---
layout: single
title: "Kotlin Android"
excerpt: "Intro to Kotlin"
---

### adb over wifi

```shell
$adb -s devname tcpip 5555
$adb connect 100.71.253.137:5555
```
### Android Studio keyboard shortcuts
- **Ctrl + Shift + n** : Search for a file.
- **Ctrl + Shift + p** : Find the type of a variable.
- **Shift + Shift** :  Search everywhere.
- **Ctrl + Alt + backward/forward Arrow**: Navigate to previous/next cursor position.

### Definitions
- **Activity**: Activity has an associated layout file. 
- **Layout**: Layout file is an XML file. Layout file contains the information about various elements and their positioning. These elements are called **views**.
- **Fragment**

## Layout inflation process
- Connects activity and its layout.
- Triggered when activity starts.
- During LI the "views" in the layout files are inflated to Kotlin view objects in memory.


- bundle object parameter in onCreate() method contain dynamic state information (typically relating to the state of the UI) from a prior invocation of the activity.
- **onCreate(savedInstanceState: Bundle?)** – The method that is called when the activity is first created 
- **onRestart()** – Called when the activity is about to restart after having previously been stopped by the runtime system.
- **onStart()** – Always called immediately after the call to the onCreate() or onRestart() methods, this method
indicates to the activity that it is about to become visible to the user. This call will be followed by a call to
onResume() if the activity moves to the top of the activity stack, or onStop() in the event that it is pushed down
the stack by another activity.
- **onResume()** – Indicates that the activity is now at the top of the activity stack and is the activity with which
the user is currently interacting.


### AppCompatActivity
It is a subclass of android which provides access to modern android features while providing compatibility with older versions of android.

The namespace for the **Android Jetpack** libraries is **androidx**. Android Jetpack is a collection of libraries, developed by Google, that offers backward-compatible classes and helpful functions for supporting older versions of Android. Jetpack replaces and expands on the set of libraries formerly known as the **Android Support Library**. Classes imported from the androidx package refer to the Jetpack libraries. Dependencies to Jetpack in your `build.gradle` file also start with androidx.

Android apps **entry point** is not a main funtion but a **main activity** as mentioned in **manifest file**.

Android uses info in manifest file to launch an app.

- You need to override the **onCreate()** method of **AppCompatActivity** class to launch the app.
- **setContentView()** method, where you provide the activity associated with the app and inflate it and draw to screen.

### Constraint layout
Constraint layout allows you to create large, complex layouts with flat view hierarchies (no nested view groups).In a constraint layout, you position a view by defining at least one horizontal and one vertical constraint.

- **View Groups**: Holds multiple view (buttons, text etc). For eg. LinearLayout.

Parent of the mainactivity is **root view**, which is the **entire screen**.

Strings in your app should be located in **resources folder**.

**findViewById()** : Find the view(element) by id you assigned.  
You should minimize the use of findViewById() as it is an **expensive operation**.

- **"lateinit" keyword**: Tells Kotlin compiler that the variable will be initialized before it is accessed. It is a common pattern in android to initialize non null variables.

- **"tools" namespace**: It is used when you want to define dummy content when you are previewing the app in the preview pane. Attribute using the tools namespace are removed when you compile the app.

- **Module**: A folder with source files and resources for a discrete piece of functionality in your app.

By default there is one **module(App)** in your Android project. In large project there are many modules with their own gradle files.

- **compileSdkVersion**: Version against which the app is compiled.
- **minSdkVersion**: Minimum suported version.
- **targetSdkVersion**: Version on which build is tested to run.

Generally compileSdkVersion and targetSdkVersion are kept to the most recent version of Android.

**applicationId** is the unique identifier which is used by both google play and Android to identify your app. Two apps on same device cannot have identical application id. Also there cannot be duplicate app id on playstore. **App id matches the package of your app**.

Resources are drawn using vector files for android apk21 and above, for 20 and below the png file generated by SDK is used.

After making any changes in the gradle file, you should click "sync now" to propogate the changes to the whole project.

**app namespace** is used for attributes that come from your custom code/libraries.

All the visual elements that make up a screen are **views**, and they are all children of **View class**.

All views have width height and background and they all can be made interactive. eg. **TextView, ImageView, EditText, CheckBoxes, Sliders, Menus, ColorPickers, Button** etc.

Every view has a location expressed as pair of left and top coordinates, and dimension expressed as width and height all units are in dp.

- **dp (Density independent pixel)**: Use it for margin, padding and border. It is fixed size for all screen densities
- **sp (Scale independent pixel)**: Use it for font-size. Depends on font size and screen pixel density.

Views are organized into view groups. Having a deep view heirarchy slows down the app. Constrainedlayout is used to build app with small number of views with complex layout to **avoid deep view heirarchy**.

**ScrollView** can contain only one view as a child, it could be either a groupview(eg LinearView) or an individual view , for eg. TextView.

**Data binding**: Optimize the access to views by creating a class at compile time from layout and accessing its properties/methods. You need to wrap the root class (view group) in layout tag.

### Binding dataclass to view
- TBD

### Introduction to navigation
- A destination is any place inside the app to which a user can navigate. 
- A navigation graph for an app consists of a set of destinations within the app. 
- Navigation graphs allow you to visually define and customize how users navigate among destinations in your app.
- A navigation host fragment acts as a host for the fragments in a navigation graph. The navigation host fragment is usually named NavHostFragment.

# Activity states
- `non existent` when user presses `back` key.
- `Stopped` when activity goes to background, either using home button or going to other activity using the `overview screen`.
- An activity is destroyes and recreated during config changes.

# What is Configuration change
- Any change to system setting like font, language etc.
- Rotation of device, window resizing and night mode changes etc.


# What is ViewModel
- ViewModel is part of the `androidx.lifecycle package`, which contains lifecycle-related APIs including lifecycle-aware components.
- Google created the `androidx.lifecycle` package and its contents to make dealing with the activity lifecycle a little less painful.
- `LiveData`, is another lifecycle-aware component.
- ViewModel’s lifecycle more closely mirrors the user’s expectations: It survives configuration changes and is destroyed only when its associated activity is finished.


# Implementing ViewModel
- Add following to you app gradle file.
- `implementation 'androidx.lifecycle:lifecycle-extensions:2.0.0'`

# ViewModel Class
- The onCleared() function in ViewModel class is called just before a ViewModel is destroyed. 
- `onCleared()` is a useful place to perform any cleanup, such as un-observing a data source.


# How to access ViewModwel instance
- Associate a ViewModel instance with an activity’s lifecycle, using code below.
- viewModelInstance = ViewModelProvider(this).get(MyViewModel::class.java)
- `ViewModelProvider(this)` creates and returns a ViewModelProvider associated with the activity.
- The ViewModel is then said to be scoped to that activity’s lifecycle.
- The ViewModelProvider acts like a registry of ViewModels. 
- When the activity queries for a QuizViewModel for the first time, ViewModelProvider creates and returns a new QuizViewModel instance. 
- When the activity queries for the QuizViewModel after a configuration change, the instance that was first created is returned. 
- When the activity is finished (such as when the user presses the Back button), the ViewModel-Activity pair is removed from memory.
- The relationship between MainActivity and QuizViewModel is unidirectional. 
- The activity references the ViewModel, but the ViewModel does not access the activity. 
- Your ViewModel should never hold a reference to an activity or a view, otherwise you will introduce a memory leak.
- When OS kills the activity(process), ViewModel is lso wiped, for this situation, use saved instance state.

# Memory leaks
- A memory leak occurs when one object holds a strong reference to another object that should be destroyed. 
- Holding the strong reference prevents the garbage collector from clearing the object from memory. 
- Memory leaks due to a configuration change are common bugs.


# What is `isFinishing` property of an activity
- Tells us if the user has finished the activity or not.
- If isFinishing is true, the activity is being destroyed because the user finished the activity (such as by pressing the Back button or by clearing the app’s card from the overview screen). 
- If isFinishing is false, the activity is being destroyed by the system because of a configuration change.


# Activity/process killed by Android
- When an activity is in stopped state(not visible), it may be killed by OS to reclaim memory.
- stopped activities are marked as killable.
- An activity in paused state is not likely to be killed by OS.
- When an activity is killed by OS viewModel is also wiped from memory, no lifecycle callbacks are invoked.


# On Saved Instance State
-  To save UI state data and use it to reconstruct the activity when it is killed by OS, Activity.onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) is overidden.
- onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) is called when an activity that is not `finished` moves to the `stopped` state.
- Important : onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) will not be called when user kills activity as it is 'finished'.
- For eg. when the user presses the Home button and then launches a different app.
- If your app process is killed by OS, then you can rest assured that Activity.onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) was already called.
- The default implementation of onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) directs all of the activity’s views to save their state as data in the Bundle object.
- The bundle object for eg. may also contain additional information added by the framework, such as the contents of an EditText or other basic UI widget state.
- When onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) is called, the data is saved to the Bundle object. That Bundle object is then stuffed into your activity’s `activity record` by the OS.
- `Activity record` gets wiped when the activity finishes. At that point, your activity record is discarded. Activity records are also discarded on reboot.
- Note that your activity can pass into the stashed state without onDestroy() being called.
- Typically, you override `onSaveInstanceState(Bundle)` to stash small, transient-state data that belongs to the current activity in your Bundle. 
- You should override `onStop()` to save any permanent data, such as things the user is editing, because your activity may be killed at any time after this function returns.


# ViewModel vs Saved Instance State (Important)
- Saved instance state protects from both configuration changes and process death.
- Since saved instance state is serialized to disk, you should avoid stashing any large or complex objects.
- Use saved instance state to store the minimal amount of information necessary to re-create the UI state (for example, the current question index). 
- Use ViewModel to cache the rich set of data needed to populate the UI in memory across configuration changes for quick and easy access.


# Debugging
- When you encounter runtime exceptions, remember to look for the last exception in Logcat and the first line in its stack trace that refers to code that you have written.
- That is where the problem occurred, and it is the best place to start looking for answers.
- `stack trace logging ` : To find out where the function is invoked from, add below line and see the stack trace.
- Log.d(TAG, "Updating question text", Exception())
- `Using breakpoints`.
-`Profiling` : View->Tool windows-> profiler.
- `Layout inspector`: tools->layout inspector.


# CREATING A NEW ACTIVITY
- Creating an activity typically involves touching at least three files: the Kotlin class file, an XML layout file, and the application manifest.
- Use Android Studio’s New Activity wizard.

# Starting an activity
- Use startActivity(Intent), this call is sent to the ActivityManager in the OS.
- The ActivityManager creates the Activity instance and calls its onCreate(Bundle?) function.
- Intents are multipurpose communication tools, Intent class provides different constructors depending on what you are using the intent to do.
- Intent(packageContext: Context, class: Class<?>)
- The Class argument specifies the activity class that the ActivityManager should start. 
- The Context argument tells the ActivityManager which application package the activity class can be found in.

# Explicit vs Implicit Intents
- Use explicit intents to start activities within your application.
- Use implicit intents to start activities outside your application.

# KOTLIN
- All files in kotlin starts with `package` specification.
- The classes and objects in the source files can be accessed using `dot` after package description.
- The package and folder structure generally match, but it is not mandatory.
- Source file name follow `camel case`, with uppercase first letter, for eg `ProcessDeclarations.kt`.

## Package and class naming conventions
- Names of packages are always lower case and do not use underscores for eg. `org.example.project`.
- Names of classes and objects start with an upper case letter and use the camel case, for eg DeclarationProcessor.

## Conditional expressions, if-else, while
- conditional expressions are often most intuitive when the value being assigned from each branch is of the same type.
- You can drop braces if a branch is a single expresion. See eg below.
- val auraColor = if (auraVisible) "GREEN" else "NONE"

### Ranges in Kotlin
- 1..5 includes 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. That is includes both bounds.
- Use of `in` in range, for eg value in 1..5
- 5 downTo 1 creates a range that descends rather than ascends.
- 1 until 5  creates a range that excludes the upper bound.

### Extracting a code to function
- Ctrl-click (right-click) on the code you selected and choose Refactor → Extract Function.


# Functions in Kotlin
- The function parameters are always read-only – they do not support reassignment within the function body.
- Function parameters and local variables exist within the scope of the function body and cease to exist once the function completes.

### File level variables
- Variable that are not local to a function or class.
- File-level variables remain initialized until program execution stops.
- File-level variables must always be assigned when they are defined.
- A local variable only has to be initialized before it is used.


### Compile-Time Constants
- Values of val may change in special cases.
- Use `Compile-Time Constants` if you want absolutely immutable data.
- Use `const` modifier before `val` keyword to define compile time constant.
- Compile-time constant must be defined outside of any function, including main, because its value must be assigned at compile time.
- Compile-time constants also must be of one of the basic types(Int, Char, String, Float, Double etc).
- Naming convention :  fully capitalizing and replacing spaces with underscores, for eg.  MAX_EXPERIENCE.

### Naming convention
- var/val and function names : use camel casing and an initial lowercase, for eg. playerName
- Compile time constants : fully capitalizing and replacing spaces with underscores, for eg.  MAX_EXPERIENCE.


## Functions, properties and local variables naming conventions
- Start with a lower case letter and use the camel case and no underscores, for eg. `processDeclarations`.
- Names for `backing properties` start with underscore.
- Exception: Factory functions used to create instances of classes can have the same name as the abstract return type.
- Names of constants (properties marked with const, or top-level or object val properties with no custom get function that hold deeply immutable data) should use uppercase underscore-separated names.
- Kotlin has file level functions but Java has functions(methods) only as part of a class.

```kotlin
const val MAX_COUNT = 8
val USER_NAME_FIELD = "UserName"
```

## Single expression functions
- Omit the return type, curly braces, and return statement.
- use the assignment operator (=), followed by the expression.

```kotlin
// A higher order function, runMyRunnable,
// taking a function parameter
fun runMyRunnable(runnable: () -> Unit) { runnable() }
// Invoke and pass a lambda
runMyRunnable { println("Hello world") }

// runMyRunnable1 is a higher order function,
// taking a function parameter
// and returning a lambda containing that function
fun runMyRunnable1(runnable: () -> Unit) = { runnable() }
runMyRunnable1 { println("Hello world") }()
```

## Unit functions
- They define no return type and have no return statement. 
- Kotlin uses the `Unit` return type to signify a function that returns no value (no return statement). 

## Functions with nothing as return type
- Function is guaranteed to never successfully complete.
- the function will either throw an exception or for some other reason never return to where it was called.

```kotlin
// Always throws [NotImplementedError] stating 
// that operation is not implemented.
public inline fun TODO(): Nothing = throw NotImplementedError()
```

## Use of TODO()
- To indicate that the function containing TODO() has some "todo".
- The function containing TODO() can have a different return type.
- The statement after TODO() is never executed.

## Function overloading 
- Using default parameter(s). 
- Using same function name and return type but different parameters.

## Function names using backticks
- We can use any characters or reserved keywrd using backticks.
- Used in testing.

```kotlin
fun `**~prolly not a good idea!~**`() {
...
}
```

## Anonymous function
- Defined using braces {}.
- Called using ().
- Anonymous function does not require – or even allow, except in rare cases – the return keyword to output data.
- Anonymous functions implicitly, or automatically, return the last line of their function definition, omitting the return keyword.
- Function type syntax: Consists of two parts: the function’s parameters, in parentheses, followed by its return type, delimited by the arrow (->).
- The parentheses is not required when defining parameters in definition of anonymous function.

```kotlin
// Defining and invoking anonymous function
{
val currentYear = 2018
"Welcome to SimVillage, Mayor! (copyright $currentYear)"
}()

fun main(args: Array<String>) {
  // Notice, no parenthesis around parameter in definition
  val greetingFunction: (String) -> String = { playerName ->
    val currentYear = 2018
    "Welcome to SimVillage, $playerName! (copyright $currentYear)"
  }
  println(greetingFunction("Guyal"))

}
```

## The `it` keyword
- Defining anonymous functions that accept `exactly one` argument.
- Requires no parameter name and arrow in the beginning.
- Above code can be written as below.

```kotlin
fun main(args: Array<String>) {

  val greetingFunction: (String) -> String = { 
    val currentYear = 2018
    "Welcome to SimVillage, $it! (copyright $currentYear)"
  }
  println(greetingFunction("Guyal"))

}
```

## Lambdas vs anonymous function
- Anonymous functions are also called `lambdas`.
- Anonymous functions definitions are called `lambda expressions`. 
- What an anonymous function returns is called a lambda result.


## Shorthand syntax for function accepting a `function type`(lambda) for its `last` parameter
- You can also omit the parentheses around the lambda argument.

## Function Inlining
- Lambda is represented as an object instance on the JVM.
- The JVM also performs memory allocations for all variables accessible to the lambda.
- This introduce memory overhead that can in turn cause a performance impact.
- Inlining removes the need for the JVM to use an object instance and to perform variable memory allocations for the lambda.
- To inline a lambda, you mark the function that accepts the lambda using the `inline` keyword.
- It is generally a good idea to mark functions that accept lambdas as arguments with the inline keyword.
- One situation where inlining is not permitted, for example, is a recursive function that accepts a lambda.

## Function References
- They can be passed as arguments instaed of lambda functions.
- Function reference converts a named function (a function defined using the fun keyword) to a value that can be passed as an argument. 
- You can use a function reference anywhere you use a lambda expression. 
- To obtain a function reference, you use the :: operator with the function name you would like a reference for.

## Kotlin vs Java: Functional programming
- Java 8 includes support for OOP & lambda expressions but does not include the ability to define a function as a parameter to a function or variable. 
- Instead, Java provides anonymous inner classes – nameless classes that are defined within another class to implement a single method definition. 
- You can pass anonymous inner classes as an instance, like a lambda.

```kotlin
public interface Runnable {
  public abstract void run();
}

fun runMyRunnable(runnable: () -> Unit) = { runnable() }
runMyRunnable { println("hey now") }()
```

# Nullability
- Some elements in Kotlin can be assigned a value of null, and some cannot. 
- We say that the former are nullable and the latter are non-nullable.


## Use of `?`, `let` and `!!` with nullable values

## Null coalescing/Elvis operator, `?:`
- If the thing on the lefthand side of me is null, do the thing on the righthand side instead.

## Precondition functions
- `checkNotNull()`: Throws an IllegalStateException if argument is null. Otherwise returns the non-null value.
- `require()`: Throws an IllegalArgumentException if argument is false.
- `error()`: Throws an IllegalArgumentException with a provided message if argument is null. Otherwise returns the non-null value.
- `requireNotNull()`: Throws an IllegalArgumentException if argument is null. Otherwise returns the non-null value.
- `assert()`: Throws an AssertionError if argument is false and the assertion compiler flag is enabled.

## String functions
- `String.indexOf()`: Gives index of a acharacter in string.
- `String.subString(IntRange)`: Returrns a substring with using range.
- `String.split()`: Returns list of strings split on the character provided.

### Destructuring
- val (type, name, price) = "shandy,Dragon's Breath,5.91".split(',')

## Converting strings to numbers
- `toFloat()`:
- `toDouble()`:
- `toDoubleOrNull()`: Don't give exception but return null.
- `toIntOrNull()`:
- `toLong()`:
- `toBigDecimal()`:

## Strings in kotlin are immutable.
- The replace function below creates a new string instead of mutating the original string.
- Though the string vartiables can be reassigned.

## Using replace method of string

```kotlin
fun toDragonSpeak(phrase: String) =
  phrase.replace(Regex("[aeiou]")) {
    when (it.value) {
      "a" -> "4"
      "e" -> "3"
      "i" -> "1"
      "o" -> "0"
      "u" -> "|_|
      "else -> it.value
      }
  }
```

### Specifying unicode characters
- Use '\u' prefix.
- val myChar: Char = '\u0950'

### Iterating over a String
- Use forEach to iterate over every character in the string

```kotlin
"Dragon's Breath".forEach {        
  println("$it\n")    
  }
```

# Numbers in Koltin

| Type | Bits | Max Value | Min Value |
|-------|--------|---------|---------|
| Byte | 8 | 127 | -128 |
| Short | 16 | 32767 | -32768 |
| Int | 32 | 2147483647 | -2147483648 |
| Long | 64 | 9223372036854775807 | -9223372036854775808 |
| Float | 32 | 3.4028235E38 | 1.4E-45 |
| Double | 64 | 1.7976931348623157E308 | 4.9E-324 |

- Operation between Ints will give an Int, If you want decimal values use one operand as double/float.
- All numeric types in kotlin are signed.

## Converting a String to a Numeric Type
- `String.toInt()`: 
- `String.toIntOrNull()`: Will return null instead of throwing an exception.
- `String.toIntOrNull()`: Will return null instead of throwing an exception.
- `String.toFloat()`
- `String.toDouble()`
- `String.toDoubleOrNull()`: Will return null instead of throwing an exception.

## Format double values
- println("Balance: ${"%.2f".format(4.1899999999)}")

## Converting doubles to Int
- `Double.toInt()`
- `Double.roundToInt()`

## Bit manipulation on Int
- `Integer.toBinaryString()`: Integer.toBinaryString(42)
- `shl()`: 42.shl(2)
- `shr()`: 42.shr(2)
- `inv()`: 42.inv()
- `xor()`: 42.xor(33)
- `and()`: 42.and(10)

# Standard Functions in Kotlin
- **receiver**: The subject of an extension function.
-  Kotlin’s standard functions are extension functions under the hood.

## apply function
- Can be thought of as a `configuration function`. 
- It allows you to call a series of functions on a receiver to configure it for use. 
- After the lambda provided to apply executes,apply returns the configured receiver.
- Apply passes nothing to lambda you provide.
- All the function calls within the lambda are now called relative to the receiver.
- Another way to say this is that they are implicitly called on the receiver.
- Apply returns the current receiver once the anonymous function completes. 

```kotlin
val menuFile = File("menu-file.txt")    
menuFile.setReadable(true)    
menuFile.setWritable(true)    
menuFile.setExecutable(false)

// Above can be written as
val menuFile = File("menu-file.txt").apply {
  setReadable(true) // Implicitly, menuFile.setReadable(true)     
  setWritable(true) // Implicitly, menuFile.setWritable(true)       
  setExecutable(false) // Implicitly, menuFile.setExecutable(false)   
}
```

## let function
- let scopes a variable to the lambda provided and makes the keyword it
- Passes the receiver to the lambda you provide.
- Returns the last line of the lambda (the lambda result).

## let vs apply
- let passes the receiver to the lambda you provide, but apply passes nothing.
- apply returns the current receiver once the anonymous functioncompletes. let, on the other hand, returns the last line of the lambda (thelambda result).

## run function
- Similar to `apply` in that it provides the same relative scoping behavior. 
- However, unlike apply, run does not return the receiver, but returns the lambda result.
- Run can also be used to execute a function reference on a receiver. 
- There is a second flavor of run that is not called on a receiver. 

```kotlin
fun nameIsLong(name: String) = name.length >= 20  
// run with a function reciever 
"Madrigal".run(::nameIsLong)  // False

// Less common use of run
val status = run {
          if (healthPoints == 100) "perfect health" else "has injuries"    
      }
```

## with function
- with is a variant of run. It behaves identically, but it uses a different calling convention.
- With requires its argument to be accepted as the first parameter rather than calling the standard function on a receiver type.
- The second is the lambda.
- It is not used often due to different syntax than other library functions.

```kotlin
val nameTooLong = with("Polarcubis, Supreme Master of NyetHack") {
          length >= 20    
}
```

## also function
- also function works very similarly to the let function.
- Just like let,also passes the receiver you call it on as an argument to a lambda you provide.
- But also returns the receiver, rather than the result of the lambda.
- Since also returns the receiver instead of the result of the lambda, you cancontinue to chain additional function calls on to the original receiver.

## takeIf function
- `takeif` evaluates a condition providedin a lambda, called a `predicate`, that returns either true or false depending on theconditions defined. 
- If the condition evaluates as true, the receiver is returned from takeIf. If the condition is false, null is returned instead.

```kotlin
// with takeIf
val fileContents = File("myfile.txt")            
.takeIf { it.canRead() && it.canWrite() }            
?.readText()

// Without takeIf
val file = File("myfile.txt")    
val fileContents = if (file.canRead() && file.canWrite()) {
    file.readText()    
} else {
    null    
}
```

## takeUnless function
- It returns the original value(receiver) if the condition you define is false.
- It is confusing and not used often, takeIf is used instead.


| Function | Passes receiver to lambda as argument? | Provides relativescoping? | Returns |
|------|----------|-------------|----------|
| let | Yes | No | Lambda result | 
| apply | No | Yes | Receiver |
| run | No | Yes | Lambda result |
| with | No | Yes | Lambda result |
| also | Yes | No | Receiver |
| takeIf | Yes | No | Nullable version of receiver |
| takeUnless | Yes | No | Nullable versionof receiver |


# Collections, List, Set, and Map
- lists, sets, and maps come in two distinct varieties: `mutable` and `read-only`.

### parameterized type
- The type defined for the contents of a collection.
- For eg. List\<String\>.

## List
- Lists hold an ordered collection of values and allow duplicate values.
- **listOf()** returns a read-only list. The read-only nature of the list has nothing to do with the val or var keyword.
- List is a generic type.

### Accessing a list’s elements
- Using the element’s index and the [] operator.
- First and last elements: List.first(), List.last().
- attempting to access anelement at an index that does not exist throws an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException`.

### Accessing a list’s elements safely
- No exception, lambda as an alternative: `List.getOrElse(index) {"Element doesn't exist"}`.
- No exception, null as an alternative: `List.getOrNull(index)`.

```kotlin
val patronList = listOf("Eli", "Mordoc", "Sophie")
patronList.getOrElse(4) { "Unknown Patron" }

val fifthPatron = patronList.getOrNull(4) ?: "Unknown Patron"
```

### Checking the contents of a list
- List.contains(): Check whether an element is present in the list. 
- List.containsAll(List): Check whether elements in the given list are present.

### Mutable list
- Use `mutableListOf()` function. You can add or delete elements in this list.
- `[]=`: Set operator, Sets the value at the index.
- `+=`: Adds an element or collection of elements to the list.
- `-=`: Removes an element or collection of elements from the list.
- `remove(element)`: remove an element from the list.
- `add(element)`: add an element at the end of the list.
- `add(index, element)`: add an element at given index of the list. 
- `toList()`:  method on mutable list to change to read only list.
- `addAll(collection)`: Adds all of another collection with contents of the same type to the list.
- `clear()`: Removes all the elements from the list.
- `removeIf{}`: Removes elements from the list based on a predicate lambda.
- `shuffled()`: Shuffles the contents of a list.

### Iterting a list

```kotlin
val patronList = listOf("Alex", "Tony", "Rocky", "Tina")
  // Normal iteration
  for (patron in patronList) {
      println("Good evening, $patron")
  }
  // functional style iteration
  patronList.forEach { println("Good evening, $it!")}
  // Iterating with index
  patronList.forEachIndexed {index, s -> println("$s you're $index")}
```

### Changing between mutable and immutable list
- Use `toList()` or `toMutableList()` method.


# What is an iterable
-  An iterable allows traversing the elements it holds, performing some action for each element.
- A collection supporting `forEach()` and `forEachIndexed()` methods.
- List,Set, Map, IntRange (ranges like 0..9)

### Reading a File into a List

```koltin
// readText() returns the contents of the file 
// as a String. Then split on newline 
val fileList = File("Data/tavern-menu-data.txt")
        .readText()
        .split('\n').forEach { println(it) }
```kotlin

### Destructuring a list 
- List offers the ability to destructure up to the `first five elements` it contains.
- Destructuring, allows you to declare and assign multiple variables in a single  expression.

```kotlin
val (type, name, price) = menuData.split(',')

// Using _ to skip unwanted elements
val (type, _, price) = menuData.split(',')
```

# Sets in Koltin
- Unlike list enforces unique element.
- Set does not index its contents, you cannot use `[]` operator with index to access elements.
- Set also have a mutable version.


### Creating a set

```kotlin
//Empty Set, notice type specification 
val stars = setOf<String>()

val planets = setOf("Mercury", "Venus", "Earth")
```

### Set methods
- `contains(element)`: Check whether an element is present in the Set. 
- `containsAll(collection)`: Check whether elements in the given collection are present.

### Accessing Set elements
- `elementAt(index)`: Access element at the given index. This method is very slow as the set iterates to the index you provide, one element at a time.
- So if you want index-based access,you probably want a List, not a Set.


### MutableSet 
- Supports adding and removing elements, likeMutableList, it does not provide index-based mutator functions.

### Mutable set mutator functions
- `add(element)`: Adds an element to set.
- `addAll(collection)`: Adds the elements of the collection to the set.
- `+=`: Adds the value(s)to the set.
- `-=`: Removes the value(s)from the set.
- `remove(element)`: Removes the elementfrom the set.
- `removeAll(collection)`: Removes all elementsin another collectionfrom the set.
- `clear()`: Removes all elementsfrom the set.

### Using while loops to iterate over collection 
- It is more flexible as they can represent state that is not purely based on iteration. 

### Use `break` to break out of any loop

### Collection Conversion
- Convert a list to a set using `toSet()` to drop the non-unique elements in a list.
- To drop duplicate element in a list, use `distinct()` as it calls `toSet()` then `toList()` internally.

### Arrays in Java and Kotlin
- In Java we have arrays of primitive types, like intArray.
- Kotlin includes a number of reference types, called Arrays, that compile down to Java primitive arrays. 
- Arrays are included primarily to support interoperability between Kotlin and Java.
- Unlike a List, an Array is backed by a primitive type when compiled to bytecode.
- A Kotlin collection is a better choice in most cases because collections provide the concept of “read-only-ness” versus “mutability” and support a more robust set of features.

| Array type | Creation function |
|------------|-------------------|
| IntArray | intArrayOf |
| DoubleArray | doubleArrayOf | 
| LongArray | longArrayOf |
| ShortArray | shortArrayOf |
| ByteArray | byteArrayOf |
| FloatArray | floatArrayOf |
| BooleanArray | booleanArrayOf |
| Array | arrayOf |

**Note**: Array compiles to a primitive array that holds any reference type.

### Creating empty collection
- You need to specify parametrized type as it cannot be inferenced from the content.

# Maps in Kotlin
- Read-only by default, use parameterized types to tell the compiler the type of their contents.
- Maps also support iteration.
- Map's elements consist of key-value pairs, and instead of index-based access using an integer, a map provides key-based access. 
- Keys are unique and identify the values in the map.
- The values, on the other hand, need not to be unique.
- The keys in a map must all be of the same type.
- The values in a map must be of the same type.
- when a map is printed, it is shown in curly braces, while lists and sets are both shown in square brackets.

### Specifying type of a map
- For eg val employeeMap: Map<String, Int>

### Creating a Map
- Use `mapOf()` and `mutableMapOf()`

```kotlin
// Using to keyword
val patronGold = mapOf("Eli" to 10.5, "Mordoc" to 8.0, "Sophie" to 5.5)

// Using Pair() method
val patronGold = mapOf(Pair("Eli", 10.75),
  Pair("Mordoc", 8.00),
  Pair("Sophie", 5.50))
```

### To keyword in kotlin
- It is a special type of function that allows you to drop the dot and the parentheses around its arguments.
- The `to` function converts the values on its lefthand and righthand sides into a Pair
- A pair is a type for representing a group of two elements.
- Maps are built using key-value pairs.

### Adding a duplicate key in map
- The existing pair will be replaced with the new one.


### Map accessor functions (Accessing Map Values)
- `[key]` (get/indexoperator): Gets the value for a key; returnsnull if the key does not exist.
- `getValue(key)`: Gets the value for a key; throws anexception if the key provided isnot in the map.
- `getOrElse(key){value}`: Gets the value for the key or returns a default using ananonymous function.
- `getOrDefault(key, default)`: Gets the value for the key orreturns a default using a value you provide.

###  Mutable map mutator functions
- `=`(assignmentoperator): Adds or updates the value in the map for the key specified.
- `+=`(plus assignoperator): Adds or updates an entry or entries inthe map based on the entry or mapspecified.
- `put(key, value)`: Adds or updates the value in the map forthe key specified.
- `putAll(listOf(Pairs))`: Adds all of the key-value pairs providedto the map
- `getOrPut(key){value}`: Adds an entry for the key if it does notexist already and returns the result;otherwise returns the existing entry.
- `remove(key)`: Removes an entry from the map andreturns the value.
- `-`(minusoperator): Returns a new map, excluding the entries specified.
- `-=`(minusassignoperator): Removes entry or map of entries fromthe map.
- `clear()`: Removes all entries from the map.


# Kotlin collections summary

| Collection type | Ordered? | Unique? | Stores | Supports destructuring? |
|-----------------|----------|---------|--------|-------------------------|
| List | Yes | No | Elements | Yes |
| Set | No | Yes | Elements | No |
| Map | No | Keys | Key-value pairs | No |


# Classes in Koltin

### Defining Classes
- A class can be defined in its own file or alongside other elements, like functions or variables.
- Defining a class in its own file gives it room to grow as the program scales up over time.
- A class is often declared in a file matching its name, but it does not have to be.
- You can define multiple classes in the same file.
- The class body holds definitions for the class’s behavior and data

### Constructing Instances
- A class's primary constructor is called by suffixing the class name with parentheses, creating an instance.
- Class definitions can specify two types of content: behavior and data.
- The parenthesis for primary constructor in class definition are optional if there are no constructor arguments.
- A body of a class is optional (but then class will not be of much use).
- By default, any function or property without a visibility modifier is public. 

```kotlin
// Code below is valid
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
    class Player
    val player = Player()
}
```

### Visibility and Encapsulation
- A `public` class function can be invoked anywhere in the program
- A `private` class function cannot be invoked outside of the class on which it is defined. 
- This idea of restricting visibility to certain class functions or properties drives a concept in object-oriented programming known as `encapsulation`.

| Modifier | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| public(default) | The function or property will be accessible by code outside of theclass. By default, functions and properties without a visibility modifier are public. |
| private | The function or property will be accessible only within the same class. |
| protected | The function or property will be accessible only within the same class or its subclass. |
| internal | The function or property will be accessible within the same module |


**Note**: Unlike Java, package private visibility level is not included in Kotlin.

### Class properties
- Data definitions, better known as class properties, are the attributes required to represent the specific state or characteristics of a class.
- When an instance of a class is constructed, all of its properties must have values.This means that, unlike other variables, class properties must be assigned an initial value.
- Like normal variables, properties can represent either read-only or mutable data using the valand var keywords, respectively.
- Properties model the `characteristics` of each instance of a class.
- For each property you define, Kotlin will generate a `field`, a `getter`, and, if needed, a `setter`. 
- A field is only accessible within a getter or a setter
- A field is where the data for a property is stored. You cannot directly define a field on a class. Kotlin encapsulates the fields for you, protecting the data in the field and exposing it via getters and setters.
- A getter is generated only when a property is writable, that is, when the propertyis a `var`.
- You can override the default generated getter and setter, when you want to specify how the data will be read or written.
- Property getters are called using the same access syntax as the other variables that you have seen. 
- Property setters are called using the assignment operator thatyou have used to assign values to variables.
- By default, the visibility of a property’s getter and setter match the visibility of the property itself.
- To expose access to a property but not expose its setter. Define the visibility of the setter separately as private.
- A getter or a setter’s visibility cannot be more permissive than the property onwhich it is defined. This implies that you can `restrict` access to a property via a getter or a setter,but they are not intended for making properties more visible.
- We use the terms “writable” and “read-only”rather than “mutable” and “immutable” for properties as for read-only computed properties the value may change on each access, for eg a randomly computed property.


```kotlin
// Overriding default getter & setter
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
    class Player {
        var name = "madrigal"
            get() = field.capitalize()
            private set(value) {
                field = value.trim()
            }
    }
}
```

### Computed properties
- A computed property is a property that is specified with an overridden get and/or set operator in a way that makes a `field` unnecessary.
- It has no initial or default value and no backing field to hold a value.

```kotlin
// Computed property
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
    class Dice() {
        val rolledValue
            get() = (1..6).shuffled().first()
    }
}
```

### Using Packages in Kotlin
- A package is like a folder for similar elements that helps give a logical grouping to the files in your project. 
- For eg, the `kotlin.collections` package contains classes to create and manage lists and sets. 
- Packages allow you to organize your project as it becomes more complex, and they also prevent naming collisions.
- Name your package in reverse-DNS style for eg com.bignerdranch.nyethack. This scales with the number of applications that you write.
- Organizing code using classes, files, and packages will help you to make surethat your code is clear as your application grows in complexity.


# Guarding Against Race Conditions
- The compiler prevents the code from compiling because of the possibility of what is known as a `race condition`. 
- A race condition occurs when some other part of your program simultaneously modifies the state of your code in a manner that leads to unpredictable results.

```kotlin
// gaurding aginst race condition
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
    class Weapon(val name: String)
    class Player {
        var weapon: Weapon? = Weapon("Ebony Kris")
        fun printWeaponName() {
            if (weapon != null) {
                // Compiler error in line below
                // Smart cast to weapon is impossible as
                // it is a mutable property and could change
                // after the null check
                println(weapon.name)
            }
        }

        // This will not give compile error
        // as "it" is a local variable, accessible
        // only within the lambda scope.
        fun printWeaponName1() {
            weapon?.also { println(it.name) }
        }
    }

    fun main(args: Array<String>) {
        Player().printWeaponName()
    }
}
```

### Private visibility vs internal visibility
- By default, Java uses package private visibility.
- It means that methods, fields, and classes with no visibility modifier areusable from classes belonging to the same package only.
- In practice, it is easily circumvented by creating a matching package and adding a class to it.
- A visibility level Kotlin provides that Java does not is the `internal` visibility level. 
- Internal visibility marks a function, class, or property aspublic to other functions, classes, and properties within the same module. 
- A `module` is a discrete unit of functionality that can be run, tested, and debugged independently.
- Modules include such things as source code, build scripts, unit tests, deploymentdescriptors, and so on.
- Modules can also depend on othermodules for source files and resources.
- Internal visibility is useful for sharing classes within a module while disallow ingaccess from other modules, which makes it a great choice for building libraries in Kotlin


# Initialization in Koltin
- This chapter covers the ways classes andtheir properties can be initialized.
- When you initialize a variable, property, orclass instance, you assign it an initial value to make it ready for use.
- `Initialization` is used to mean “everything required to make a variable, property, or class instanceready to use,”
- `Instantiation` tends to be limited to “creating an instanceof a class.”

## Constructors

### Primary constructors
- Allows its caller to specify the initial values that an instance of a class will require in order to be constructed.
- Those values are then available for assignment to the properties defined within the class.
- You can also specify `default values` that should be assigned if an argument is not provided for a specific parameter.
- `Named arguments` can be used while calling a constructor just like functions, they allow you to specify the arguments to a function or constructor in any order.
- Primary constructor is optional.

### Why prepend variable names with underscores
- Temporary variables, including parameters that you do not need to reference more than once, are often given a name starting with an underscore to signify that they are single-use.

```kotlin
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
  // Properties defined in the class body
  class Player(_name: String,
            _healthPoints: Int,
            _isBlessed: Boolean,
            _isImmortal: Boolean) {
    var name = _name
        get() = field.capitalize()
        private set(value) { field = value.trim() }
      var healthPoints = _healthPoints
      val isBlessed = _isBlessed private 
      val isImmortal = _isImmortal
    }
}
```

### Defining properties in a primary constructor
- For properties that use the default getter and setter, you can specify both in one definition.
- This is preferred way as it leads to less duplication of code.

```kotlin
fun main() {
  // Properties defined in primary constructor
  // Primary constructor with default argument
  class Player(
      _name: String,
      var _healthPoints: Int = 100,
      val _isBlessed: Boolean,
      private val _isImmortal: Boolean
  ) {
      var name = _name
        get() = field.capitalize()
        private set(value) {
            field = value.trim()
        }

      // Init block for argument validation
        init {
          require(_healthPoints > 0) { "healthPoints must be greater than zero." }
          require(name.isNotBlank()) { "Player must have a name." }
        }

      // Secondary constructor with
      // initialization logic
      constructor(name: String) : this(
        name,
        _isBlessed = true,
        _isImmortal = false ) {
          if (name.toLowerCase() == "kar") _healthPoints = 40
        }
    }
}
```

### Secondary constructors
- The `primary constructor` specifies the parameters required for any instance of the class.
- The `secondary constructor`, specifies the alternative ways to construct the class (while still meeting the requirements of the primary constructor).
- Secondary constructor must either call the primary constructor, providing it all of the arguments it requires, or call another secondary constructor which follows the same rule. 
- You can also use a secondary constructor to define initialization logic, code that will run when your class is instantiated.
- You can define multiple secondary constructors for different combinations of parameters. 
- Secondary constructors cannot be used to define properties like primary constructors.

### Initializer Blocks
- The initializer block is a way to set up variables or values as well as perform validation. 
– Like checking to make sure that the arguments to the constructor are valid ones. 
- The code it holds is executed when the class is constructed.

### Property initialization
- Properties can be initialized using function return values.
- If your property requires complex initialization logic like multiple expressions consider pulling this initialization logic into a function or an initializer block.
- The rule that states that properties must be assigned on declaration does not apply to variables in a smaller scope, like a function in the class.
- Properties have more strict rules on initialization because they can be accessed from other classes if they are public. 
- Variables local to a function, on the otherhand, are scoped to the function in which they are defined and cannot be accessed from outside of it.

### Initialization Order
1. The primary constructor’s inline properties.
2. Required class-level property assignments.
3. init block property assignments and function calls.
4. secondary constructor property assignments and function calls.
-  Initialization order of the init block (item 3) and the class-level property assignments (item 2) depends on the order they are specified in.


### Delaying Initialization

#### Late initialization
- Any `var` property declaration can be appended with the `lateinit` keyword, and the Kotlin compiler will let you put off initializing the property until you assign it.
- You could implement this pattern using a nullable type instead, but you wouldthen be required to handle your property’s nullability throughout your codebase,which is burdensome.
- Kotlin doesprovide a way to check whether a late-initialized variable has been initialized, the `isInitialized` check.
- However, `isInitialized` should be used sparingly.

#### Lazy initialization
- Some properties may involve some more computationally intensive task when being initialized, like reading from a file.
- If your class does not require access to a property right away, then lazyinitialization could be a good choice.
- Lazy initialization is implemented in Kotlin using a mechanism known as a `delegate`.
- Delegates define templates for how a property is initialized.
- You use a '`lazy` delegate with the `by` keyword. 
- Lazy initialization takes a lambda in which you define any code that you wish toexecute when your property is initialized.

```
// Use of lazy property
fun main() {
  class Player(
      _name: String,
      var healthPoints: Int = 100,
      val isBlessed: Boolean,
      private val isImmortal: Boolean
  ) {
      var name = _name
        get () = "${field.capitalize()} of $hometown"
        private set(value) { field = value.trim() }

      val hometown by lazy { selectHometown() }

      private fun selectHometown() = File("towns.txt")
          .readText()
          .split("\n")
          .shuffled()
          .first()
    }
}
```


# Inheritance

### Creating a Subclass
- A `subclass` shares all properties with the class it inherits from, commonly known as the parent class or `superclass`.
- In Kotlin classes are closed, they prohibit subclassing by default. 
- For a class to be subclassed, it must be marked with the `open` keyword.
- To override a function or property, it must be marked `open` in the partent class.
- To access any member of superclass from subclass, use `super` keyword.
- When you override a function in Kotlin, the overriding function in the subclass is, by default, open to being overridden (as long as the subclass ismarked open).
- If you do not want this, then use `final` keyword, then the function can't be overridden. 
- By requiring the explicit use of the open and override keywords, Kotlin requires you to opt in to inheritance. This reduces the chances of exposing classes that were not meant to be subclassed and prevents from overriding functions that were never meant to be overridden.
- Every class in Kotlin descends from a common superclass, known as `Any`, without you having to explicitly subclass it in your code

```kotlin
// Example of extandable class
fun main() {
  open class Room(val name: String) {
    protected open val dangerLevel = 5
    fun description() = "Room: $name"
    open fun load() = "Nothing much to see here..."
  }

  // Create subclass
  class TownSquare : Room("Town Square")

  // subclass another version
  open class TownSquare1 : Room("Town Square") {
    override val dangerLevel = super.dangerLevel - 3
    final override fun load() = "The villagers rally and cheer as you enter!"
  }

  // Room can hold TownSquare type
  // the functions called will be from 
  // TownSquare, this is polymorphism
  var currentRoom: Room = TownSquare1()
  println (currentRoom.description())
  println (currentRoom.load())

  // true
  currentRoom is Room
}
```

### Polymorphism
- A variable can hold the subclass types and the members(properties and methods) accessed will be of the subtype.
- So dependending on the subtype the members will be accesed, this is called `polymorphism`. 
- So, a function can take a class and its subclass as parameter, and only the appropriate member will be accessed/invoked.

### Type Checking
- `is` operator  lets you query whether an object is of a certain type.
- A subtype is type of parent type.

### Type casting
- Type casting allows you to treat an object as if it were an instance of a different type. 
- This gives you the power to do anything with an object that you would dow ith an object of the type you specify (such as call functions on it).
- The `as` operator denotes a type cast.
- You have to use it safely. An example of a safe cast would be casting from an `Int` to a more precise number type like `Long`.
- Cast from String to Int would cause a `ClassCastException`.
- Cast is different from a conversion, Some strings can be converted to integers; no String can be cast to an Int.
- If you must make an unsafe cast, then surrounding it with a try/catch block is a good idea. 
- It is best, however, to avoid type casting unlessyou are sure that the cast will succeed.

```kotlin
fun main() {
  fun printIsSourceOfBlessings(any: Any) {
    val isSourceOfBlessings = if (any is Player) {
      // smart casting done by conpiler
      any.isBlessed
    } else {
        (any as Room).name == "Fount of Blessings"
    } println ("$any is a source of blessings: $isSourceOfBlessings")
  }
}
```

### Smart casting
- The Kotlin compiler is smart enough to recognize a type of a class based on the check.

### Any class
- Any provides abstract definitions for common functions like `toString()`, `equals()` and `hashCode()` which are backed by an implementation found on the platform that your project targets.
- The Any type is one of the ways that Kotlin allows for platform independence – it provides an abstraction above the class that represents a common superclass on each specific platform, like the JVM. 



# Objects
### The object Keyword
- With the `object` keyword, you specify that a class will be limited to a single instance – a `singleton`.
- The first time you access an object, it is instantiated for you. That same instance will persist as long as your program is running, and each subsequent access will then return the original instance.
- There are three ways to use the object keyword: `object declarations`, `object expressions`, and `companion objects`. 

### Object declarations
- They are useful for organization and state management, especially when you need to maintain some state consistently throughout the lifespan of your program.
- Because an object declaration is instantiated for you, you do not add a custom constructor with code to be called at initialization. Instead, you need an initializer block for any code that you want to be called when your object is initialized.
- An object is initialized when an object declaration is referenced by one of its properties or functions.

### Object expressions
- Defining a new, named class is not always necessary. Perhaps you need a class instance that is a variation of an existing class and will be used for a one-off purpose.
- In fact, it will be so temporary that it does not even require a name.
- It adheres to the rules of the object keyword in that there will only ever be one instance of it alive at a time, but it is significantly smaller in scope than a named singleton.
- An object expression takes on some of the attributes of where it is declared. If declared at the file level, an object expression is initialized immediately. If declared within another class, it is initialized when its enclosing class is initialized.

```kotlin
fun main() {
  // subclass of TownSquare, object expression
    val abandonedTownSquare = object : TownSquare() {
        override fun load() = "You anticipate applause, but no one is here..."
    }
}
```

### Companion objects
- Ties the initialization of an object to a class instance.
- A companion object is declaredwithin another class declaration using the companion modifier. A class can haveno more than one companion object.
- There are two cases in which a companion object will be initialized. First, a companion object is initialized when its enclosing class is initialized. This makes it a good place for singleton data that has a contextual connection to a class definition. Second, a companion object is initialized when one of its properties or functions is accessed directly.
- The contents of this companion object will not be loaded until either PremadeWorldMap is initialized or load is called. And no matter how many times PremadeWorldMap is instantiated, there will only ever be one instanceof its companion object.

```kotlin
fun main() {
    class PremadeWorldMap {
        companion object {
            private const val MAPS_FILEPATH = "nyethack.maps"
            fun load() = File(MAPS_FILEPATH).readBytes()
        }
    }

    // call method of companion object
    PremadeWorldMap.load()
}
```

### Nested Classes
- Not all classes defined within other classes are declared without a name. You canalso use the class keyword to define a named class nested inside of anotherclass. 
- Nested class is onlyrelevant to outer class; it does not need to be accessed from anywhere else in the application.
- Making GameInput a private, nested class means that GameInputcan be used within Game but does not clutter the rest of your API

### Data Classes
- Data classes are classes designed specifically forholding data, and they come with some powerful data manipulation benefits.
- Data classes provideimplementations for toString, equals, and hashCode functions that may work better for your project.
- They provides `toString()` etc method for properties declared in Coordinate’s `primary constructor`.
- Data classes also provide a 'copy` function that makes it easy to create a new copy of an object.
- Classes that are often compared orcopied or have their contents printed out are candidates for being made dataclasses.
- Data classes are not permitted to be superclasses.

```kotlin
// create a new instance of Player that has all of the same
// property values as another player except for isImmortal
val mortalPlayer = player.copy(isImmortal = false)

// Destructuring in data class
val (x, y) = Coordinate(1, 0)
```

### Destructuring declarations in data classes
- Data classes automatically enable your class’s data to be destructured.

###  limitations and requirements on data classes
- Must have a primary constructor with at least one parameter 
- Require their primary constructor parameters to be marked either val or var 
- Cannot be abstract, open, sealed, or inner

### Enumerated Classes
- Special type of class useful for defining a collection of constants, known as enumerated types.
- You canreference enumerated types using the name of the enum class, a dot, and the name of the type.
- enums can represent more than simple naming constants.
- Enums, like other classes, can also hold function declarations.
- You call functions on enumerated types, not on the enum class itself.
- `valueOf` is a function available on all enum classes that returns an enumerated type with a name that matches the String value that you pass to it.
- Enum classes are asimple form of ADT(Algebraic Data Types).
- For more complex ADTs, you can use `sealed` classes to implement more sophisticated definitions. 

```kotlin
enum class Direction(private val coordinate: Coordinate) {
    NORTH(Coordinate(0, -1)),
    EAST(Coordinate(1, 0)),
    SOUTH(Coordinate(0, 1)),
    WEST(Coordinate(-1, 0));

    fun updateCoordinate(playerCoordinate: Coordinate) =
        Coordinate(playerCoordinate.x + coordinate.x, 
            playerCoordinate.y + coordinate.y)
}

data class Coordinate(val x: Int, val y: Int) {
    val isInBounds = x >= 0 && y >= 0
    // Operator Overloading
    operator fun plus(other: Coordinate) = Coordinate(x + other.x, y + other.y)
}

fun main() {
    Direction.EAST
    Direction.EAST.updateCoordinate(Coordinate(1, 0))
}
```

### Operator Overloading
- When you want to usebuilt-in operators with your custom types, you have to override the operators’functions to tell the compiler how to implement them for your type. This is known as `operator overloading`.
- You can overload the `plus` operator prepending the function declaration with the `operator` modifier.
- If you override equals yourself, you should also override afunction called hashCode.


### Algebraic Data Types
- Allow you to represent a closed set ofpossible subtypes that can be associated with a given type. Enum classes are asimple form of ADT.

###  sealed classes 
- Sealed classes let you specify an ADT similar to anenum, but with more control over the specific subtypes than an enum provides.
- Sealed class has a limited number of subclasses that must be defined within the same file where it is defined, otherwise it is ineligible for subclassing. 



# Interfaces and Abstract Classes
- Using an interface, a group of classes can have properties or functions in common without sharing a superclass or subclassing one another.
- Interfaces only specify the what, not the how.
- An interface allows you to specify common properties and behavior that aresupported by a subset of classes in your program – without being required tospecify how they will be implemented.
- Abstract classes are similar to interfaces inthat they can specify the what without the how, but they are different in that theycan also define constructors and act as a superclass.
- Properties in an interface need not be initialized.
- Functions in an interface need not have a body.
- The `open` keyword is not required on function declarations in an interface. This is because all properties and functions you add to an interfacemust be open implicitly, since they would serve no purpose otherwise. An interface outlines the `what`, and the `how` must be provided in the classes that implement it.

```koltin
fun main() {
// Interface
  interface Fightable {
    var healthPoints: Int
    val diceCount: Int
    val diceSides: Int
    val damageRoll: Int
    fun attack(opponent: Fightable): Int
  }

  // Implementing interface
  class Player(
    _name: String,
    override var healthPoints: Int = 100,
    var isBlessed: Boolean = false,
    private var isImmortal: Boolean
  ) : Fightable { ... }
}
```

### Implementing an Interface
- First, you declare that the class implements the interface. 
- Then, you must ensure that the class provides implementations for all of the properties and functions specified in the interface.
- All implementations of interface properties and functions must be marked with `override`.

### Default Implementations in inerface
- You can provide a default implementation for property getters and functions in an interface. 

### Abstract Classes
- It is never instantiated. It's purpose is to provide function implementations through inheritance to subclasses that are instantiated.
- It is defined by prepending the `abstract` keyword to a class definition. In addition to function implementations, abstract classes can include abstract functions.

### Abstract class vs interface
- A class can extend (or subclass) only one abstract class, but it can implement many interface.
- An interface cannot specify a constructor.

**Note**: `exitProcess` is a Kotlin standard library function that terminates the running instance of the JVM.


# Generics

### Defining Generic Types
- A generic type is a class that accepts an input of any type in its constructor. 
- generic type parameter: The parameter specified for a generic type, such as <T>.

### Generic Functions





























### Generic type
- A class that accepts a generic input - i.e., an input of any type.

### Backing properties
- If a class has two properties which are conceptually the same but one is part of a public API and another is an implementation detail.

```kotlin
class C {
    private val _elementList = mutableListOf<Element>()

    val elementList: List<Element>
         get() = _elementList
}
```

### Running a Kotlin program
- Kotlin program file extension is `.kt`, after compilation it becomes `...Kt.class`

```shell
$ kotlinc main.kt -include-runtime -d main.jar
$ java -jar main.jar
```

### Kotlin functions
- If a function body is a single expression, then parens from function body can be removed.
- If compiler can infer the return type of function the there is no need to specify it.
- If a function has no return statement then it return type is `Unit`, which can be omitted.

### String Templates
- We can use a simple variable(using `$`) or an arbitrary expression(using `${expression}`) in a string.

### Kotlin Data types
- **Byte**: 8 bits. 
- **Short**: 16 bits.
- **Int**: 32 bits, default type for numbers if the size fits.  
- **Long**: 64 bits, specify `L` at the end of a number to specify Long type.  
- **Float**: 32 bits, specify `f` or `F` at the of a number to specify Float type.
- **Double**: 64 bits, default type for fractional numbers.

There is not implicit widening conversions in kotlin, for eg., a function with a double parameter will not accept float or int parameter.

### Literal constants
- **Integral**: eg. 100
- **Long integer**: eg. 100L
- **Hexadecimal**: Preceded by `0X` eg. 0X0F
- No octal literals in kotlin

```kotlin
// Use of underscore in number constants
val oneMillion = 1_000_000
val creditCardNumber = 1234_5678_9012_3456L
val socialSecurityNumber = 999_99_9999L
val hexBytes = 0xFF_EC_DE_5E
val bytes = 0b11010010_01101001_10010100_10010010
```
### Boxing/unboxing/autoboxing
- **Boxing**: Conversion of primitve type to an object.
- **Unboxing**: Conversion of object type to an primitve.
- **Autoboxing**: Automatic conversion of primitve type to an object.

**Note**: In JVM, the numbers are internally stored as primitive types, unless they are nullable or generics is involved.

### No implicit conversions of types while assignment
- Smaller types are NOT implicitly converted to bigger types.
- We cannot assign a value of type Byte to an Int variable without an explicit conversion.

### Implicit conversion of types on arithmetic operation
- Type is inferred from context and Arithmetical operations are overloaded for appropriate conversions, for example

```kotlin
val l = 1L + 3 // Long + Int => Long
```

### Every number type supports the following conversions:
- toByte(): Byte
- toShort(): Short
- toInt(): Int
- toLong(): Long
- Explicit conversions
- toFloat(): Float
- toDouble(): Double
- toChar(): Char

### Arithmetic operations
- Division of integers gives an integer.
- Division of interger and a float gives float/double.

### Bitwise operations
- shl(bits) – signed shift left
- shr(bits) – signed shift right
- ushr(bits) – unsigned shift right
- and(bits) – bitwise and
- or(bits) – bitwise or
- xor(bits) – bitwise xor
- inv() – bitwise inversion
- Bitwise operations Don't have a special character, instaed use function name in infix form
- They are available for Int and Long only.

```kotlin
val x = (1 shl 2) and 0x000FF000
```



### Null Safety
Kotlin variables can't hold null values by default.
```kotlin
val languageName: String = null //Invalid code, fails to compile
val languageName: String? = null //Valid code
```

### Control Flow
- If, else can return a value.
- The value is the last statement in each of the block in if, else is returned
- Switch case is replaced by **when()**.
- In when(), there is "else", which is same as "default" of switch case.
- When() is very flexible.

### Functions in Kotlin
- Functions are **first class citizen**.
- Functions in a class by **default** are **final**, so you **cannot override** them.
- You need to declare Functions as **open** to **override** them.
- After overriding function in derived we can declare it as final to avoid further overriding.
- default value of parameters.
- named parameters in functions.
- function with unlimited no. of parameters.
- If function body consists of one statement, you can use assignment for eg. 
```kotlin
fun sayHello(name: String) = println("Hello, $name!")
```

```kotlin
fun printString(vararg names:String) {
for (name in names) {
println(name)
  }
// if we want to pass this "names" to another function 
// we need to use "spread operator",  "*" , i.e. "*names"
}
```

### Spread operator: See above

- function returning "Nothing", actually never returns.

### Classes in Kotlin
- Classes are **first class citizen**.
- **No** concept of **fields** in Kotlin.
- Kotlin classes have properties but no fields.
- **No need** of **new** operator when **instantiating** classes.
- Classes by **default** are **final**, so you cannot inherit from them.
- You need to declare class as **open** to **inherit** from them.

- **Primary** and **secondary** constructors.
- Secondary constructor should always call primary constructor first.

```kotlin
// The class below is complete, diesn't require body. It has two properties.
// viz, id and name
class customer(var id:Int, var name:String="default") {
   init {
       name = name.toUpperCase()
    }
   constructor(email:String):this(0, "") {

   }
}
```

- getters and setters.
- Use of backing field in setters.

### Visibility modifiers :
1. **public(default)**: accessible anywhere.

- Top level declarations:
2. **private**: Available anywhere inside the file containing declaration 
3. **internal**: available anywhere in the same module.

### Classes
- **private**: only available to class members.
- **protected**: same as private and subclasses.
- **internal**: any client inside the module.

### Data classes:
- Data classes/objects are called **Java beans**. They just hold the data.
- They implicitly implements getters/setters/toString/getHashCode/equalTo/copy etc methods.
- So there is no boilerplate code.
- For eg.
```kotlin
data class customer(var id:Int, var name:String="default")
```
- copying with some properties changed

customer2 = customer1.copy(name="saurabh")

- Enum classes in Kotlin
- value, ordinal, values.
- override toString.
- Only use of semicolon in Kotlin.

### Objects in kotlin (Singleton).
- We can create objects, without them being instances of any class (just like javascript).
- Use the keyword object.
- For eg.
```kotlin
object Global {
  val PI = 3.14
}
```

### Abstract classes
- Declared using **abstract** keyword.
- They cannot be instantiated.
- Can have abstract methods and properties.

### Interface
- Declared using **interface** keyword.
- Very similar to abstract class, but they cannot have state (ie only **abstract property** allowed).
- A class cannot inherit from more than one base class.
- The above is called **single inheritance model**.
- A class can inherit from one base class and multiple interfaces.

### Generics in Kotlin
- Generic interfaces.
- Generic functions.

```kotlin
interface repository<T> {
  fun getById(id:Int):T
  fun getAll():List<T> 
}
interface Repo {
  fun <T> getById(id:Int): T
}
```
### Null safety
- By default Kotlin is null safe.
- You cannot assign null to any default variable type.
- A nullable variable has to be declared using "?" (**elvis operator**).
- e.g. var personName: String? = "Saurabh"
- Implicit also works eg. var personName = null
- Calling methods on nullable variable, eg. personName?.length
- You can **override compiler** error by using "!!" personName!!.length

### Type casting
- **Smart casting** by the compiler.

### Tuples
- Tuples has been **removed** from Kotlin.
- Tuples are implemented using **Pair()** and **Triple()**.
- Bigger Tuples can be constructed using data classes.

### Miscellineous
- Check if object is type of a class, **if obj is classType**.
- Safely cast int variable to string, **input as? String**.
- Deconstructing values, val (capital, population) = Pair("Delhi", 1000)
- Deconstructing values also works on data classes
- Deconstructing values also works in for loop
- Base class for exceptions in Kotlin is **Throwable**
- In kotlin there are no fields, there are properties.
- **Kotlin sequences** are equivalent of **Java Streams**.
- Unlike Java Streams Sequences are available on all platforms like android etc.
- Parallel processing is not yet available in sequences (check latest Kotlin version).

### Properties
- Classes represent **state** using **properties**. 
- A property is a class-level variable that can include a getter, a setter, and a backing field.
- If you would like to customize how a property is referenced, you can provide a custom getter and setter. For example, if you would like to expose a property’s getter while restricting access to its setter, you can designate that setter as private.

### Exceptions
- try, catch, finally
- try/catch can also return a value

### Declaring constants
- There is **no const keyword**.
- Top level constants/properties are declared using **val**.
- Others are embedded in Singleton(object) as val property.

### Kotlin annotations
- Used in testing to annotate functions as **@test** etc.

### Higher order functions

### Lambda Expression in Koltin
- Functions can be passed as parameters to functions using **::functionName**
- Better approach is to pass a lambda expression.
- Lambda function syntax, {x, y -> x + y}
- If lambda function takes only one parameter, we can use **it**.
- For eg, {x -> x * x} is same as {it * it}
- Alternate syntax if last parameter is a function/lambda expression.
- Eg, unaryOperation(3, {it * it}) is same as unaryOperation(3){it * it}
- An alternate to lamba function is **anonymous function**.
- For eg, unaryOperator(3, fun(x:Int):Int { return x * x})


### Lambda functions usage
- In older Java versions, we used anonymous inner class for “When an event happens, run this handler” or
“Apply this operation to all elements in a data structure.” For these cases, instead of declaring a class and passing an instance
of that class to a function, you can pass a function directly. So lambda can be used as an alternative to an anonymous object with
only one method.

- Another classical use of lambda expressions: working with collections. 

```kotlin
val people = listOf(Person("Alice", 29), Person("Bob", 31))
println(people.maxBy { it.age })
Person(name=Bob, age=31)
```

-  If a lambda just delegates to a function or property for eg. people.maxBy(Person::age)

- Most of the things we typically do with collections in Java (prior to Java 8) can be
better expressed with library functions taking lambdas or member(property or method) references

### Syntax for lambda expressions
- A lambda expression is always surrounded by curly braces.
- there are no parentheses around the arguments.
- The arrow separates the argument list from the body of the lambda.
- You can store a lambda expression in a variable and then treat this variable like a normal function.
- { x: Int, y: Int -> x + y }

### Running a Lambda function
- Using brackets after the body: { println(42) }()
- Using run library function: run { println(42) }

### Breaking down syntax
- people.maxBy({ p: Person -> p.age })
- The type can be inferred from the context and therefore omitted: people.maxBy({ p -> p.age }) 
- You don’t need to assign a name to the lambda argument in this case.
- You can move a lambda expression out of parentheses if it’s the last argument in a function call: people.maxBy(){ p -> p.age }
- When the lambda is the only argument to a function, you can remove the empty parentheses from the call: people.maxBy { p -> p.age }
- if the context expects a lambda with only one argument, and its type can be inferred: people.maxBy { it.age }

### Lambda, capturing variables from the context
- fun printProblemCounts(responses: Collection<String>) {
var clientErrors = 0
var serverErrors = 0
responses.forEach {
if (it.startsWith("4")) {
clientErrors++
} else if (it.startsWith("5")) {
serverErrors++
}
}
println("$clientErrors client errors, $serverErrors server errors")
}

###  member references, a feature that lets you easily pass references to existing functions
-  A member reference has the same type as a lambda that calls that function, so you can use the two interchangeably.
- - It’s convenient to provide a member reference instead of a lambda that delegates to a function taking several parameters.
- people.maxBy { person: Person -> person.age } can be replaced by
- people.maxBy (Person::age)


### Using Java functional interfaces
- Interface like OnClickListener has only one abstract method. Such interfaces are called functional interfaces, 
or SAM interfaces, where SAM stands for single abstract method.

- You can pass a lambda to any Java method that expects a functional interface.


### compile time constants
- Syntax: const val FIRST_NAME = "Saurabh"

### Anonymous functions
- Used to pass function as arguments and/or return function as value

### interface
- Interface is similar to abstract classes but they dont have a state(properties), they only have (abstract)methods.
- Methods in interface are abstract by default.
- Abstract methods in interface don't require "abstract" keyword unlike abstract classes.
- kotlin/Java support multiple inheritance ONLY for interfaces and not for classes.
- In Java we extend a class and implement an interface.
- from Java 8 onwards interface can have defined methdos, this allows to change interface without breaking code.

### data class
- Give default methods like to String(), equals(), hashCode(), copy() etc.
- 

### object keyword
- Used to create singleton
- Syntax: object BookShelf{
}
- Name of class is the name of the singleton object (for eg. BookShelf)

### anonymous inner class
- using object keyword.
- Syntax: var myIntance = object: MyInterface{ }
- Used to implement an interface for an anonymous class.


### companion object
- @JVMStatic annotation
- Syntax: companion object {}
- Can be used for Factory for pattern.
- used in place of static, as there is no static keyword in kotlin.


### strong reference in Java/Kotlin
- Default behaviour.
- Garage collected when there are no references left for an object.

### Weak Reference in Java/Kotlin
- GC responsible to determine reachability for garbage collection.
- Eager GC.

### Soft Reference in Java/Kotlin
- GC responsible for garbage collection.
- Lazy GC(Only on OutOfMemoryError).

### Delegated properties use cases
- lazy properties: the value gets computed only upon first access;
- observable properties: listeners get notified about changes to this property;
- storing properties in a map, instead of a separate field for each property.


**Note**: The convention is, if the last, or in this case the only, parameter of a 
function is another function, it doesn't need to go into brackets.

### Closures
- Difference in Kotlin closures is that internal function **captures value everytime**.
- This is unlike other languages where value is captured only once.

### Extension functions
- Using this you can extend existing class without inheriting them.
- For eg, you can add a function to string class.
- fun String.hello() {
  println("Hi there!!")
}
- The scope of extension functions is the file.
- They can be imported in another file for accessing them.
- Extension functions are statically resolved.

### Interoperability with Java
- Talk to Java from Kotlin
- When using a java class, Kotlin allows accessing properties directly.
- Rather than using getters and setters.
- When extending an interface with single function, we don't need to extend the interface traditionally, we can simply pass the lambda function, which will become the definition of the interface function.

### Working with nulls from java
- Platform types in Kotlin, "!". Used when there is no equivalent in kotlin.
- Using jetbrains annotation.

### Talking Kotlin in Java
- Use "@JvmField" to access property in Kotlin from Java code , as field.
- Use "@JvmOverloads" to call a Koltin function with default values.
- Use "@JvmName" to call a Koltin function with a different name.
- "@JvmName" handles the problem of generics and type erasure.
- Use "@Throws("IOException::class)" to use use a Kotlin function which throws an exception.

### Top level functions and properties in Kotlin (how to access them from Java):
- To invoke a Kotlin top level function from java, use "fileName.functionName()"
- Where fileName is the class file in which the top level functionName resides.
- Kotlin compiler creates static class and static function, which is used by Java.
- We can change the fileName by using "@JvmName("newFileName")
- Kotlin properties can also be accessed similary by using suitable getter.
- If we want to access the property as field then we need to declare it "const val propName" in Kotlin file.

### Accessing top level function from Java
- To invoke a Kotlin top level function from java, use "fileName.functionName(className)"
- Where fileName is the class file in which the top level functionName resides.
- clasName is the class instance containing the extension function.

### Interoperatbility with Java7 and 8
- Kotlin is compatible with Java 6.
- Lambda function is implemented as anonymous class.
- There are two new libraries targetting java 7 and 8.

### Kotlin standard library
- Kotlin does not have its own collections.
- Higher order functions are implemented as extensions.
- Kotlin provides interfaces (mutable/immutable) on top of java collections.
- Kotlin collecions:
  Lists,
  Arrays, (including equivalent primitive types viz, charArrays, IntArrays etc)
  Maps,
  Sets,
  HashMap,
  etc..

### Immutable list creation
- declare list of strings : var list = listOf("string1", "string2"..)
- declare list of strings : val list = Arrays.asList("string1", "string2"..)
- declare empty list of strings : var list = emptyList<String>() or listOf()
- declare list of numbers : val list = 1..100

To print the type of class of the variable: println(list.javaClass) 

### Mutable list creation
declare list of strings : var list = mutableListOf("string1", "string2"..)

list.add("stringX")

hashmap creation
declare hashmap : var hashmap = hashMapOf(Pair("string1", "stringa"), pair("string2", "stringb") ....)

setOf()
hashSetOf()

### Arrays of primitive type like int, boolean etc
- booleanArrayOf()
- intArrayOf()
- charArrayOf()
- flaotArrayOf() etc

### Filtering, Mapping, Flatmapping in Kotlin
- forEach : Takes a lambda operation to be executed on each element of iterable.
- for eg., iterable.forEach {i -> i<1}
- iterable.filter(), returns an iterable with elements that matches the predicate in filter.
- for eg., iterable.filter { it.match == 1}
- iterable.map { }
- iterable.flatMap { }

concept of map: [a,b,c] f(x) => [f(a),f(b),f(c)]
concept of flatMap: [[a,b],[c,d]] f(x) => [f(a),f(b),f(c), f(d)]

### Lazy evaluation with sequences in Kotlin
- Programming concept: Lazy evaluation vs eager evaluation.
- Haskell by default is lazy evaluated.
- In Kotlin asSequence() converts an iterable to be lazily evaluated.
- asSequence().take(30)... execute logic on first 30 elements only.
- generateSequence(1) {x -> x + 10}, it does more than isSequence()

### String Extensions in Kotlin
- with(file) { here we can access functions/properties of file directly}
- stringObject?.let { it.length}

### Build tools in Kotlin
- We can use Kotlin with:
  command line,
  Ant(build tool),
  IntelliJ Idea,
  Eclipse,
  Maven,
  Gradle

### Enums in Kotlin


Local functions: function with in a function
- local function allows code reuse(?).

Infix functions: applied to member function and extension function with single parameter. Use "infix" keyword in function definition.

- Infix function allows to create more fluent call


### Anonymous functions Vs lambda expression
- Af allows mutliple return calls.
- Af : multiple returns, can specify return type.

Like named functions, anonymous functions can contain any number of expressions. The returned value of the function is the result of the final expression.

### Inline functions
- "inline" keyword, used for flattening a higher order function which takes lambda expression as parameter. Helps in optimization, no call stack

-Optimize higher order function by inlining calls.
- overhead, no anonymous class for lambda expression in parameter.
- You can use "noinline" for lambda expression if you don't want to inline it.
- Inline doesn't work if you assign lambda to a variable (ie store it).
- Inlining is good when function body is small.
- Stack trace and debugging for inline functions. Goto call site/function body.

### Return and local return
- Use label to perform local returns from lambdas.

return@mylabel
label@ function definition.

- non local return is allowed only from inline function.

- anonymous function does a local return by default. Whereas lambda does a non local return by default.

### Tail recursion
- Allows for TCO(tail call optimization).
- Tail recursive function: the last call should be to the function itself.
- Tail recursive function can be optimised in kotlin usin the keyword "tailrec".

### Operator overloading
- certain operators can be overloaded using conventions.

In k we can't define a symbol as an operator, but we can overload certain operators.
For eg. You can define a data class method with keyword "operator" and name "plus" to overload + operator.
We can also use "operator" key with extension function.

### Lambda extension: lambda with receivers
This help in creating a DSL like code. You can access the class properties in the lambda function.

### Invoking instances in Kotlin
- Use member function "invoke" with "operator" keyword.
- now we can use "()" on the instance of the class, eg classInstance().

- Lambda extension and Instance invoking lets you create DSL which is used in Android development and Gradle scripting.also groovy style Kotlin HTML builders. also JSON DSL and SQL dialects.

### Functional constructs in Kotlin
- Currying, composition not supported in standard Kotlin lib.
- But the above can be implmented using Kotlin language.
- There are open source libs which implements them.
- Kotlin language can be easily extended with new functionality, eg. currying and composition functions.

### Fields in Kotlin
- Kotlin doesn't have fields. 
- you can define get() and set() for a property using "field" keyword.
- field can back only one property.

- Late initialization in Kotlin
- Late initialization of a property.

lateinit keyword for variable to be initialized by the framework, not by the user, user will later access this property.This also helps in getting meaningful exception.

### Nested classes
- You can access like a namespace (if it's not private) nested class and can instantiate it .
- You can also access it from Java code in same manner.
- Nested class with "inner" keyword can access the properties of outer class.
- You can access Inner classes only by instance of the outer class and not as a namespace.

### Companion objects
kotlin does not have static class or method. We can create a top level method or create a method in top level object(singleton?).
In kotlin static method are implemented using companion objects. These are accessible from Java code.
- You can directly access the methods of inner class by using "companion" keyword. This way you can skip the derefrencing of inner class.
- Each class can have only single companion object.
- The methods of inner class can be accesed from java by annotating them by "JvmStatic".

### Hiding constructors in Kotlin
- To hide the constructor being called use "private constructor" keyword(s) after class keyword.
- This way you can force the user to use only the factory method of the class for creatng instances of that class.

### Sealed classes in Kotlin
- Kotlin doesnt have algebric data types.
- But you can simulate them using sealed classes.
- Sealed classes puts restriction on what type of classes can inherit from base class.
- Inner(nested classes) iheriting from outer class to implement two different return types for http request, viz. "success" and "failure".
- The "sealed" keyword before the "class" keyword ensures that no other class can inherit from the outer class.
- Starting Kotlin v1.1, the inner class restriction was removed. Now classes can be defined  anywhere within the same file.

### Type aliases in Kotlin
- Type aliases allow us to provide aliases for certain types, while keeping the underlying characteristics the same.
-  For eg. typealias Name = String

### Delegation

### Problems with inheritance
- Long heirarchies
- Bloated classes
- Kotlin has single inheritance model
- Composition Vs inheritance
- Compose functionality of different classes into one class. Eg log + permissions = controller.
- Leads to better design.
- Composition in kotlin is achieved by **delegation**.
- Delegation of classes
- Delegation pattern.

### Delegation of properties

### Delegating member function in kotlin
Syntax:
Class xyz(repository: Repository): Repository by repository {}

Now xyz can call the methods of Repository directly, without dereferencing .
This is possible because the repository instance is passed to the constructor.
We should not inject too many dependencies, at most two.

- Local delegates in kotlin
- Extension properties in kotlin

### Generics:
- Generic constraints in kotlin
- Generics and invariance

### Covariance in kotlin
- Contravariance in kotlin
- Type projections in kotlin

### Metaprogramming:
- Using java reflection in kotlin
- Using kotlin reflection
- Type erasure on jvm
- Reified generics in kotlin
- Custom annotations in kotlin

### Asynchronous programming
- Kotlin does not bind user to any particular approach of asynchronous programming.
- Kotlin uses coroutines for asynchronous programming.
- Suspendible computation.

### Async await in kotlin
These are std library functions and not keywords.

### Yields in kotlin
- yield is a function and not keyword.

### Coroutines and reactive extensions in kotlin

- Types are non null by default in kotlin 
- var name: String = null #non billable string.
- 14:54 : does null has a type. Are there different type of nulls.
- Pair(1,"a") == 1 to "a".

### Collections
- array, list, map
- Collections are immutable by default.

### vararg parameter

### Spread operator
- `*`:  Converts list to sequence of individual items.

### Class declaration options
- class name #shortest form
- **Init block** in class declaration run when instance is created. Class can have multiple init blocks.
- Properties in a class can be accessed directly instead of getter and setter (unlike java)
- All **init blocks** run before **secondary constructor**.
- **Getters and setters** are **automatically defined** for properties in kotlin.
- You can override default getter and setter in kotlin.
- In kotlin visibility is public by default.

### Visibility modifiers
- **Internal**: class is public within a module.
- **Private**: available only in the file where it is defined.
- **Protected**: accessible from within the class or its children.
- Interfaces can define methods and properties.
- Property initializer is not allowed in interface.
- You can override the interface properties.
- Check for types

- xyz [!]is ABC
- Typecast xyz as abc
- Smart casting in kotlin, done by compiler.
- Classes in kotlin are final(closed) by default.you need to "open" it to inherit from it. Same holds true for properties.
- Anonymous Inner class using "object expression". It is used in android development to implement click listener.
object: parentClass { }
- Companion objects:these are scoped to instance of other class.
- A factory can have private primary constructor(See below). It restricts the user from invoking primary constructor.
- class myClass private constructor (Val prop1: String).
- Kotlin enforced immutability by forcing you to explicitly declare classes, properties, and methods to be open for extension/override.
- Static class declared using object don't have constructors.
- Enum classes

### Sealed classes
- list.filterNotNull() vs. String.orEmpty()

**DSL** : Domain specific language.

### Java Bean
- JavaBeans are classes that encapsulate many objects into a single object (the bean).
- It is a java class that should follow following conventions:
- Must implement Serializable.
- It should have a public no-arg constructor.
- All properties in java bean must be private with public getters and setter methods.
- val lazyInit: Int by lazy { 10 }   
- Above is example of lazy initialization.

### Property vs field
- Property has getters and setters and are accessible publicly.
- Field is private and has no getters and setters.
- Koltin don't have fields.

### What are checked exceptions. 
- In Kotlin all exceptions are unchecked. 
- This means that the Kotlin compiler does not force you to wrap all code that could produce an exception in a try/catch statement.
- In Java all exceptions are unchecked. 
